



produced by william coon





the noble lord
a comedy in one act

by
percival wilde

the noble lord

characters
he.
she.
peters.

the noble lord

_a secluded spot in the maine woods in the neighborhood of a
summer hotel. it is the middle of . the trees are covered
with foliage, a hot sun casts dancing shadows upon the mossy
ground, and the air is full of the twittering of birds and the
rustle of leaves. a winding path crosses from one side to the
other, and near the center is a little clearing: the stump of a
felled tree, with the lichen-covered trunk itself near it, and a
patch of grassy turf. the eye cannot penetrate far through the
riotously growing underbrush, but as one looks upwards, to the
left, a thinning of foliage, allowing a glimpse of the sky, gives
evidence of the near proximity of some small body of water._

_as the curtain rises the scene is empty. there is only the song
of birds, and the whisper of a gentle breeze. for a few seconds
nothing else is heard. then, suddenly, not far away, there is the
sound of a splash, followed by the scream of a drowning woman,
"help! help! help!"  there is a tremendous crashing through the
underbrush, and another voice, very masculine, very english,
shouts, "where are you? where are you?" rather indefinitely the
first speaker answers, "here! help! help!"  another crashing
through the underbrush, followed by a second splash, and
presently, after a short pause, there enters upon the stage a
tall, much bedraggled englishman, bearing in his arms the
motionless body of an extremely good-looking girl. both of them
are very wet, and a trail of water marks their progress across
the scene. reaching the clearing, the englishman methodically
deposits the girl on the ground, backs away a foot or so, and
notices that his hands are wet. he reaches into a hip pocket and
draws forth a handkerchief: the handkerchief is wetter than his
hands. with a gesture of vexation he throws it away, and gives
his attention to the girl. he looks at her quizzically; then,
rather timidly, he kneels at her side, and lays his ear over her
heart. he rises promptly with a satisfied nod, carefully removes
his dripping coat, folds it neatly, and places it on the log.
again he kneels, this time with his knees on either side of the
girl's head, and laboriously begins to apply the sylvester
method, counting audibly as he does so. at "ten" he stops
wearily, pauses, and again applies his ear to her heart. the
result is evidently pleasing, and after a few more sylvester
movements, he begins to vary the procedure by removing her shoes
and alternately chafing her hands and feet. presently she sighs
deeply. for the third time he pauses to listen to her heart.
slowly and deliberately her left arm rises, to encircle his neck
in a confiding clasp. he sits back on his haunches, politely
surprised._

she. (_faintly_) mother! mother, dear!

he. eh?

she. mother, dear, i'm so glad----

he. (_interrupting energetically_) really, i beg your pardon.

she. (_continuing without a break_) i'm so glad you've come.

he. ah, yes. . . . quite so.

she. kiss me, mother.

he. (_trying to rise_) eh?

(_she does not release him._)

she. kiss me, mother.

he. but i'm not your mother.

she. (_plaintively_) won't you kiss me, mother?

he. (_looks around furtively. then he obliges her._)

she. ah! that's so nice. (_she pauses. shudders._) hold me close,
mother, hold me close. i've had such a terrible dream!

he. good heavens! you're not dreaming now. . . .

she. i dreamt--i dreamt-- (_he has raised her to a sitting
position. she stops abruptly. looks about._) where--where am i?

he. (_surprised_) don't you know?

she. no.

he. (_in a matter-of-fact tone_) we are about half a mile away
from the poland springs hotel, poland springs, maine.

she. (_vaguely_) oh! (_she pauses._) and you, how do you come
here?

he. strolling.

she. strolling?

he. i reached the hotel this morning. it was hot--beastly hot. i
went for a walk in the woods.

she. and then?

he. i beg your pardon?

she. what happened then? how did we meet?

he. don't _you_ know?

she. i remember nothing--i'm confused. (_she tries to get up, but
sits on the log with a little exclamation._) my shoes--where are
my shoes?

he. (_fetching them_) here they are.

she. thank you. . . . (_she looks at them._) those aren't my
shoes!

he. (_politely_) no?

she. they're wet.

he. (_nodding_) they would be.

she. but they're not mine.

he. (_shrugging his shoulders_) i found them on your feet.

she. (_confused_) on my feet?

he. yes. . . . (_an afterthought_) one on each.

she. oh! . . . (_she tries to put them on._) i can't get them on.

he. no?

she. will you help me? (_he assists her; she feels her clothes
and exclaims_): oh!

he. did i hurt you?

she. (_astonished_) my clothes are wet!

he. (_thoughtfully_) yes.

she. how funny! (_noticing him._) and you--you're wet also!

he. (_nodding_) soaked.

she. what a coincidence! how curious! how did it happen? (_she
pauses._) oh, if i could only think! think! (_he rises, and waits
politely._) tell me: you must know.

he. well, i was strolling through the woods. i heard a splash

she. (_interrupting_) a splash! oh, don't say any more: i
remember! that horrible lake! horrible! it was so warm at the
hotel: i had gone off to the woods. i was sitting at the edge of
the lake--on a rock--reading. i must have been sleepy. i fell in.

he. then you screamed.

she. yes: i was drowning! drowning! i called for help!

he. i heard you.

she. i sank--i sank, oh, miles and miles! it felt as if hands
were trying to pull me down to the bottom! i screamed again--and
then--then--i felt a strong arm around my waist--i was dizzy--
there was a roaring in my ears--i knew no more.

he. (_sympathetically_) too bad, too bad.

she. and you--(_rising to her feet enthusiastically_)--you were
the man who jumped in!

he. (_apologetically_) i was passing by.

she. you saved my life! oh, how can i ever thank you? my hero!
(_she throws her arms about his neck._)

he. that's all right. . . .

she. but it's not all right. i can never repay you! never! never!
not if i live to be a thousand years old! (_she kisses him._)

he. (_calmly_) that's the second time.

she. the second time?

he. (_nodding_) i kissed you before.

she. oh! (_releasing him quickly._) you didn't!

he. yes, i did.

she. while i was unconscious?

he. precisely.

she. oh, how _could_ you do such a thing? how could you?

he. (_taking up his coat_) it was by request. (_takes cigarette
case from pocket._)

she. (_incredulously_) i asked you?

he. you said, "mother! mother! kiss me!" (_takes cigarette from
case. pleased to see that it is dry. puts it between his lips._)

she. i said _that?_

he. they were your first words. (_produces match-safe from
trouser pocket._)

she. but you didn't have to kiss me.

he. no? (_trying to strike a match. it is wet. so are the
others._)

she. you didn't have to!

he. i tried to explain that i was not your mother, but you seemed
to know better. (_he throws the cigarette away._) you insisted. i
couldn't help it.

she. (_after a pause, coquettishly_) what do you mean: you
couldn't "help it"?

he. (_perfectly willing to flirt_) you know--(_he hesitates._)

she. (_encouragingly_) yes?

he. you're a pretty girl--a deucedly pretty girl.

she. oh, no!

he. but you are; honor bright!

she. you really think so?

he. (_nods_) there was no one around. it was the kind of an
opportunity which does not present itself every day: life is so--
monotonous. and you didn't seem to object.

she. (_coyly_) i couldn't very well--not while i was unconscious.

he. that's so. i am a man, with a man's tastes. and you begged me
so hard--it was so inviting--well, i kissed you.

she. (_after a pause_) on the lips?

he. yes. on the lips.

she. (_after a pause_) how often?

he. eh?

she. how often did you kiss me?

he. only once.

she. was that all?

he. (_with a smile_) why, it's hardly worth mentioning.

she. (_going to him and taking his hands magnanimously_) well, i
forgive you.

he. thank you.

she. (_invitingly_) two kisses is not a great deal for saving my
life.

he. no?

she. i owe you much more than that!

he. (_standing motionless_) really?

she. (_with her lips half an inch from his_) really! (_a pause._)
really! (_he does not kiss her. she gives it up. sits on the log,
drawing him to her side._) you must tell me all about yourself.
just think: if it hadn't been for you, i would be at the bottom
of the lake now. what a horrible tragedy that would have been: to
die in such a way! . . . (_she pauses._) it's natural that i
should want to know something about the man who saved me from
that. . . .

he. (_with embarrassment_) i don't like to talk about myself----

she. (_interrupting encouragingly_) you're still a young man,
aren't you?

he. thirty-one.

she. (_laying her hand on his_) are you?

he. (_nodding_) last .

she. (_lying with the insouciance of expertness_) i'm just
twenty. (_he nods his head, without showing the least sign of
disbelief._) eleven years between us.

he. just the right ages, aren't we?

she. (_leaving her hand where it is_) do you think so?

he. eleven years difference--ideal!

she. ten and a half.

he. eh?

she. i was born in .

he. oh, were you? (_sagely._) that's better yet.

she. do you think so--lord brookfield?

he. (_surprised--or simulating it effectively._) eh?

she. lord brookfield?

he. how on earth did you know it?

she. (_with a laugh_) oh, i am not so stupid as all that!

he. you recognized me?

she. no. i have never seen you.

he. a photo?

she. no.

he. then how did you know? . . .

she. (_interrupting_) lord brookfield is a well-known man. the
papers said he was coming to the hotel. i knew every other
guest----

he. but three or four others arrived this morning.

she. americans.

he. oh!

she. you are english. i could see that right away.

he. (_after a pause_) how clever of you!

she. oh, lord brookfield!

he. and how curious that i should meet you in this way--informal,
so to speak.

she. (_laughing_) odd, wasn't it? (_she rises._) ugh!--how my
clothes are sticking to me!

he. that's so. you had better change.

she. and you?

he. i'm rather wet myself.

she. will you take me back to the hotel?

he. the sun is very hot here.

she. (_instantly changing_) oh, would you rather stay?

he. (_does not answer for a few seconds. then, a little
abruptly_) tell me: can you swim?

she. (_startled_) eh?

he. can you swim?

she. lord brookfield! of course i can't!

he. that's curious.

she. curious?

he. neither can i.

she. (_staggered, but returning to the attack with magnificent
self-possession_) oh, but you swam splendidly! clothes and all!
all the way from the other side of the lake!

he. did i?

she. of course you did! one plunge, and a few magnificent
overhand strokes. . . . (_she notices his peculiar expression,
and hesitates._)

he. (_thoughtfully_) plunge?

she. why, certainly.

he. (_shaking his head_) i would have sworn i waded.

she. (_laughing uneasily_) you are really too modest, lord
brookfield.

he. let's see. (_he picks up his coat, and shakes it out._) of
course, i might have swum, but--ah! the water line comes only as
far as the waist!

she. that means nothing.

he. no? (_feeling his head._) if i had plunged, my hair would
have been wet.

she. it dried in the sun.

he. ah, yes! but my cigarettes! (_taking one from the case._)

she. the case is waterproof.

he. still, the matches are wet. (_producing the box from his
trouser pocket, and trying to strike one._) you see?

she. (_with a forced laugh_) lord brookfield, don't deny that you
saved my life!

he. that is what i am trying to do.

she. (_frigidly_) i beg your pardon?

he. i jumped in without thinking. it was the natural thing to do:
i heard you scream for help. but the moment the water came to my
waist i knew that if it went any deeper i should have to call for
help also.

she. well?

he. i was spared that humiliation: the pond isn't over three feet
deep in any place. and i waded the whole twenty feet from one end
to the other. . . . and i _can't_ swim.

she. but i was drowning! drowning!

he. (_politely_) are you in the habit of drowning often?

she. (_rising indignantly_) lord brookfield!

he. i nearly forgot to mention----

she. what?

he. that i saw you jump in.

she. oh!

he. it was pleasant while it lasted, wasn't it? and romantic!
why, romantic doesn't begin to describe it! (_imitating_)
"mother, kiss me!"

she. oh, how can you?

he. unconscious--helpless--and you didn't remember! not even the
shoes. that was clever--very clever! and the hands trying to pull
you down to the bottom: that was the touch of genius! (_he pauses
with a smile._) ah, well, i was willing to have a little fun. (_a
man is heard whistling a popular song in the distance. he listens
attentively._)

she. (_after a pause_) you played with me--played with me. oh,
you're disgusting! revolting! what a thing for a _man_ to do! i
thought---- (_she breaks off._)

he. (_encouraging her to continue_) yes?

she. nothing. . . . (_then, seeing no reason to restrain
herself._) i thought lord brookfield was a gentleman!

he. oh, but _i'm_ not.

she. not a gentleman?

he. no. . . . i'm not lord brookfield.

she. _not_ lord brookfield?

he. no.

she. then who on earth are you?

he. (_sweetly_) i? i'm a friend of his.

she. a friend?

he. a close friend--very close.

she. who? who?

he. (_leisurely_) i'm not related, you know, but i see a lot of
him. we're thick--very thick.

she. (_un patiently_) who are you?

he. (_simply_) i'm his valet.

she. (_horrified_) oh! . . . and you kissed me! a valet! you
dared kiss me!

he. at your request.

she. (_almost choking with rage_) but a valet! a valet!

he. i'm a good valet. one of the best there is.

she. your insolence! oh! (_she seizes the handkerchief which he
has left on the log, and wipes her mouth furiously._)

he. my handkerchief.

she. (_throwing it to the ground_) oh, you coward! you. . . . you
(_she sits on the log, inarticulate with rage. the whistle is
heard again._)

he. listen to me.

she. i won't.

he. (_earnestly_) listen to me.

she. i don't want to talk to you!

he. i'll help you.

she. (_rising_) i don't want your help.

he. (_bluntly_) then you're silly.

she. (_wheeling furiously_) how dare you----

he. (_interrupting_) i'll make a bargain with you.

she. (_scornfully_) what dealings can there be between us?

he. did you hear the whistling a minute ago?

she. well?

he. (_with meaning_) that's brookfield.

she. (_after a pause_) well?

he. the path leads here. he is following the path----

she. (_after still another pause_) well?

he. you and i might be very good friends----

she. (_thoughtfully_) oh, you mean----

he. a valet is not paid very well----

she. no. . . . still----

she. if anything comes of it----

she. (_slowly_) comes of what?

he. you understand me. (_he pauses; smiles. then, in a
mephistophelian manner_): your clothes are still wet, aren't
they?

she. (_with full comprehension_) yes----

he. enough said! (_the whistle is heard, close at hand._) quick!

she. (_going off_) you won't tell? (_he shakes his head._) i'll
remember you. (_she runs into the woods._)

he. (_sits on the log, laughs heartily. he produces another
cigarette, and tries in vain to light it. then, as an atrocious
little cockney enters whistling gaily, he addresses him sharply_)
peters!

peters. (_surprised_) m'lord?

he. give me a light, peters.

peters. yes, m'lord. (_produces match, etc._)

he. thanks. (_he blows a few whiffs into the air. then stops, and
surveys peters thoughtfully._) peters, you're a brave man, aren't
you?

peters. (_modestly_) i am 'andy with me fists, m'lord.

he. that's not quite what i mean, peters. . . . (_he pauses._)
peters, you have the making of a hero in you. something tells me
that you're going to have your chance.

(_there is a loud splash from the same direction as before,
followed by screams of "help! help!"_)

peters. (_with excitement_) m'lord!

he. (_quietly_) yes, peters?

peters. somebody's calling for 'elp, m'lord!

he. yes, peters.

peters. shall i go, m'lord?

he. yes, peters. . . . gallop!

_and as_

peters. (_charges wildly into the shrubbery, shouting_):  h'i'm
coming! h'i'm coming!

the curtain falls







